DOC: add a guide on spatial indexing (#3498)
geopandas/geopandas: doc/source/docs/user_guide/spatial_indexing.rst

.. currentmodule:: geopandas

Spatial indexing
================

When you want to know a spatial relationship (known as a spatial
predicate) between a set of geometries A and a geometry B (or a set of
them), you can compare geometry B against any geometry in a
set A. However, that is not the most performant approach
in most cases. A spatial index is a more efficient method for pre-filtering comparisons of geometries before using more computationally expensive spatial predicates.
GeoPandas exposes the
Sort-Tile-Recursive R-tree from shapely on any GeoDataFrame and
GeoSeries using the :attr:`GeoSeries.sindex` property. This page outlines its options
and common usage patterns.

Note that for many operations where a spatial index provides significant
performance benefits, GeoPandas already uses it automatically (like :meth:`~GeoDataFrame.sjoin`,
:meth:`~GeoDataFrame.overlay`, or :meth:`~GeoDataFrame.clip`). However, more advanced use cases may require

> a direct interaction with the index.

Reviewer: Maybe we could mention the many-to-many case up front as an example of a situation where direct interaction makes sense?

Author: Not sure I follow what you meant...

    point_outside = shapely.Point(1050000, 150000)
    points = geopandas.GeoSeries([point_inside, point_outside], crs=nyc.crs)

You can verify that visually.

.. ipython:: python

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 2, sharey=True, figsize=(8, 4))

    nyc.plot(ax=axs[0], edgecolor="black", linewidth=1)
    nyc.envelope.boundary.plot(ax=axs[1], color='black')
    points.plot(ax=axs[0], color="limegreen")
    @savefig points.png
    points.plot(ax=axs[1], color="limegreen");

Querying the index
------------------

Scalar query
------------

You can now use the :attr:`~GeoSeries.sindex` property to query the index. The
:meth:`~sindex.SpatialIndex.query` method, by default, returns positions of all geometries
whose bounding boxes intersect the bounding box of the input geometry.

.. ipython:: python

    bbox_query_inside = nyc.sindex.query(point_inside)
    bbox_query_outside = nyc.sindex.query(point_outside)
    bbox_query_inside, bbox_query_outside

Both the point we know is inside a geometry and the one that is outside
a geometry return one hit as each intersects one bounding box in the
tree.

.. ipython:: python

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 2, sharey=True, figsize=(8, 4))

>     nyc.plot(ax=axs[0], edgecolor="black", linewidth=1)

Reviewer: Like Brendan, I did find all the cells and <axes> text a bit distracting from the message here and think maybe it would be cleanered to do this as a notebook like those we have under gallery. Appreciate you can't do the links easily like that though. Perhaps also, could you put the common part of this in a function, so it's just one cell to draw the backdrop and then the only changes in each section are layering on the highlights? 

Pandas does seem to have the cross refs from notebooks figured out, see .e.g https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/style.html or probably more pertinently https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/_sources/user_guide/style.ipynb.txt

this semes to have hard coded relative links to where the source files are.

I might have a play around with this as well, I've done this kind of linking via myst markdown at some point before, but that was in the context of jupyterbook, not straight up sphinx.

indices as you’ve seen above.

The other option is to return a boolean array with shape
``(len(tree), n)`` with boolean values marking whether the bounding box
of a geometry in the tree intersects a bounding box of a given geometry.
This can be either a dense numpy array, or a sparse scipy array. Keep in
mind that the output will be, in most cases, mostly filled with
``False`` and the array can become really large, so it is recommended to
use the sparse format, if possible.

You can specify each using the ``output_format`` keyword:

.. ipython:: python

    bbox_array_query_dense = nyc.sindex.query(points, output_format="dense")
    bbox_array_query_dense

The dense array above has rows aligned with the rows of ``nyc`` and
columns aligned with the rows of ``points`` and indicates all pairs
where a *hit* was found.

The same array can be represented as a :func:`scipy.sparse.coo_array`:

.. ipython:: python

    bbox_array_query_sparse = nyc.sindex.query(points, output_format="sparse")
    bbox_array_query_sparse

One example illustrating the usage is a task of finding the number of
neighboring geometries for each subborough. You can use the spatial

> index to check all geometries against each other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

.. ipython:: python

    neighbors = nyc.sindex.query(nyc.geometry, predicate="intersects", output_format="sparse")
    neighbors

Since you are using ``nyc`` on both sides of the query here, the

> resulting array is square-shaped with diagonal filled with ``True``.

Reviewer 2: The rendered output is not square shaped, so it is harder to see the pattern described here.  Is it possible to reshape the output to ensure it renders as a square matrix?

Author: This refers to the output of the cell above which is a square, although sparse. I'll try to be more precise about what this refers to and maybe use the dense output as it might be clearer when talking about square shape.

Getting the sum along one axis can then give you the answer. Note that
since a geometry always intersects itself, you need to subtract one.

.. ipython:: python

    n_neighbors = neighbors.sum(axis=1) - 1
    n_neighbors

The result is a numpy array you can directly plot on a map.

.. ipython:: python

>     nyc.plot(n_neighbors, legend=True);

Reviewer: is this missing a savefig? I assume the intent is to show this in the docs, not just the code?

Nearest geometry query
----------------------

> While checking the predicate query is indeed extremely useful, GeoPandas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While checking the spatial predicate using the spatial index is indeed extremely useful, GeoPandas
```

> also allows you to use the spatial index for the nearest query - finding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also allows you to use the spatial index to find
```
